---
title: What the heck does 'bind' do in JavaScript, anyway?
description: >-
  Understanding how bind works in JavaScript, and how to use it.
image: 'article-icons/js.svg'
tags:
  - javascript
---

Bind is a magical little method attached to the prototype of functions in Javascript. It is used to bind a host class to a method that you are passing in to another function, meaning that the value of the keyword `this` will change depending on what is bound to the function.

This article presumes a working knowledge of `this`. If you're unfamiliar, you can learn all about it [here](https://codeburst.io/all-about-this-and-new-keywords-in-javascript-38039f71780c).

## Anonymous callbacks

In Javascript, functions can be passed as a parameter to another function. Let's take a look at an example:

```js
document.addEventListener('click', (event) => {
  console.log(event.target);
});
```

With our event listener, we pass a callback function. This callback function is stored internally inside the document object, and is then called upon when a click event on the document occurs. The target of the click event will be logged to the console.

## Named callbacks

Similarly, we could also pass the function like this:

```js
function onClick(event) {
  console.log(event.target);
}

document.addEventListener('click', onClick);
```

In this instance, we just define a named function and pass it in, instead of an un-named arrow function. Sometimes we may want to do this to better document our code (with named functions), or just when the logic becomes a bit cluttered.

## We need more class!

However, what if we were dealing with classes?

```js
class Application {
  clickCounter = 0;

  constructor() {
    document.addEventListener('click', this.onClick);
  }

  onClick(event) {
    console.log(event.target);
    this.clickCounter++;
  }
}
```

In the example above, we will again log the target of the click event. After that, we will increase a counter that we store within our class. Do we think this will work?

Unfortunately, it won't.

Why? I hear you ask. Well, it all lies with the usage of `this` - more specifically when we call `this.clickCounter++`.

When we use `this`, we are referencing the data held within the **class that this method is being called in**. When we pass our callback in to the event listener, it is then being called within the `document` class, which actually binds `this` to `event.target`, but that's for another article altogether. Unfortunately for us, this means that `clickCounter` does not exist when we try to increment it.

## Bind it!

How can we solve this, you ask? Well, that's where `bind` comes in to play.

```js
class Application {
  clickCounter = 0;

  constructor() {
    document.addEventListener('click', this.onClick.bind(this));
  }

  onClick(event) {
    console.log(event.target);
    this.clickCounter++;
  }
}
```

When we use `.bind(this)`, we are saying "When you call this function, make sure it remembers where it comes from - **this class** is its home"

When this method is now called, no matter where it is called from, it will refer back its original parent class whenever it tries to access `this`, therefore incrementing our `clickCounter` as expected.

So, if we run this now, it will work as we expect! Of course, there are other applications of `bind`, such as binding a separate class instance. However, this is much less common and rare to find.

I hope this small article helps you on your way to understanding the inner depths and quirks of JavaScript!
